Add the "sending emails from a service" tutorial (#7)
ballerina-guides/integration-tutorials: send-emails-from-a-service/README.md

# Sending emails from a service

## Overview

> In this tutorial, you will develop a service that sends an email when a client makes an appointment at a hospital. The email sent to the user includes information about the appointment.

Reviewer: Atm, this reads like, the service just sends an email when an appointment is made. But, that's not the case, right? It is the reservation service that also sends an email.

> To implement this use case, you will develop a REST service with a single resource using Visual Studio Code with the Ballerina Swan Lake extension, and then run the service. This resource will receive the user request, retrieve details from the backend service, and send an email to the user with the appointment details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To implement this use case, you will develop a REST service with a single resource using Visual Studio Code with the Ballerina Swan Lake extension. This resource will receive the user request, reserve the appointment, and send an email to the user with the appointment details.
```

Removed from service orchestration too.

The flow is as follows.

> 1. Receive a request with a JSON payload in the following form.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Receive a request with a JSON payload similar to the following form.
```

        "dob": "1940-03-19",
        "ssn": "234-23-525",
        "address": "California",
        "phone": "8770586755",
        "email": "johndoe@gmail.com",
        "cardNo": "7844481124110331"
    },
    "doctor": "thomas collins",
    "hospital_id": "grandoaks",
    "hospital": "grand oak community hospital",
    "appointment_date": "2023-10-02"
}
```

2. Extract necessary details from the request (e.g., hospital, patient, doctor, etc.) and make a call to the hospital backend service to request an appointment. A response similar to the following will be returned from the hospital backend service on success.

```json
{
    "appointmentNumber": 1,
    "doctor": {
        "name": "thomas collins",
        "hospital": "grand oak community hospital",
        "category": "surgery",
        "availability": "9.00 a.m - 11.00 a.m",
        "fee": 7000.0
    },
    "patient": {
        "name": "John Doe",
        "dob": "1940-03-19",
        "ssn": "234-23-525",
        "address": "California",
        "phone": "8770586755",
        "email": "johndoe@gmail.com"
    },
    "hospital": "grand oak community hospital",
    "confirmed": false,
    "appointmentDate": "2023-10-02"
}
```

> 3. Finally, call the payment backend service to make the payment and retrieve the reservation response. Send an email to the user with the appointment details.

Reviewer: The email is sent only if payment is successful, right? Can we convey that?

```json
{
    "appointmentNo": 1,
    "doctorName": "thomas collins",
    "patient": "John Doe",
    "actualFee": 7000,
    "discount": 20,
    "discounted": 5600.0,
    "paymentID": "8458c75a-c8e0-4d49-8da4-5e56043b1a20",
    "status": "settled"
}
```

### Concepts covered

- REST API
- HTTP Client
- Email Client

## Develop the application

### Step 1: Set up the workspace

Install [Ballerina Swan Lake](https://ballerina.io/downloads/) and the [Ballerina Swan Lake VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=wso2.ballerina) on VS Code.

### Step 2: Develop the service

Follow the instructions given in this section to develop the service.

1. Create a new Ballerina project using the `bal` command and open it in VS Code.

```bash
$ bal new send-emails-from-a-service
```

2. Introduce the source code in files with the `.bal` extension (e.g., the `main.bal` file). 

Import the 
- `ballerina/email` module to send emails using the SMTP protocol
- `ballerina/http` module to develop the REST API and define the clients that can be used to send requests to the backend services

> - `ballerina/log` module to log debug/error information for each client request

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `ballerina/log` module to log debug, error or info level information for each client request
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/email;
import ballerina/http;
import ballerina/log;
```

> 3. Define [configurable variables](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#configurability) for the port on which the listener should listen and the URLs of the backend services. Also define configurable variables for the host, username, and password of the SMTP client. Enable two factor authentication on your google account, create an app password and use that in place of your true email password.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Define [configurable variables](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#configurability) for the port on which the listener should listen and the URLs of the backend services. Also define configurable variables for the host, username, and password of the SMTP client. Enable two factor authentication on your Google account, generate an app password, and use the app password in place of your email password.
```

Can we add a link for App password generation?

> 3. Define [configurable variables](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#configurability) for the port on which the listener should listen and the URLs of the backend services. Also define configurable variables for the host, username, and password of the SMTP client. Enable two factor authentication on your google account, create an app password and use that in place of your true email password.

Reviewer 2: Why can't we combine  ` Define [configurable variables](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#configurability) for the port on which the listener should listen and the URLs of the backend services` and `Also define configurable...`? I feel we try to say the same thing.

> 3. Define [configurable variables](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#configurability) for the port on which the listener should listen and the URLs of the backend services. Also define configurable variables for the host, username, and password of the SMTP client. Enable two factor authentication on your google account, create an app password and use that in place of your true email password.

Reviewer 2: `Enable two factor authentication on your google account, create an app password and use that in place of your true email password` is more likely a `Note` kind of information.

Check this out: https://github.com/MaryamZi/integration-tutorials/blob/8172ffab991b22d76ac23063e4c87a75450cbd3d/service-orchestration/README.md?plain=1#L131

    int appointmentNumber;
    Doctor doctor;
    Patient patient;
    decimal fee;
    boolean confirmed;
    string card_number;
|};

type Payment record {|
    int appointmentNo;
    string doctorName;
    string patient;
    decimal actualFee;
    int discount;
    decimal discounted;
    string paymentID;
    string status;
|};

type ReservationRequest record {|
    record {|
        *Patient;
        string cardNo;
    |} patient;
    string doctor;
    string hospital_id;
    string hospital;
    string appointment_date;
|};

type ReservationResponse record {|
    int appointmentNo;
    string doctorName;
    string patient;
    decimal actualFee;
    int discount;
    decimal discounted;
    string paymentID;
    string status;
|};
```

- The `ReservationRequest` record uses [record type inclusion](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/type-inclusion-for-records/) in the type of the `patient` field to include all the fields from the `Patient` record along with the `cardNo` field.

- The initial record definitions can be generated using the "Paste JSON as record" VSCode command with the relevant JSON payloads and the records can then be modified as necessary.

> 6. Define the [HTTP service (REST API)](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#rest-service) that has the resource that accepts user requests, makes calls to the backend services to retrieve relevant details, and responds to the client. Use `/healthcare` as the service path (or the context) of the service, which is attached to the listener listening on port `port`. Define an HTTP resource that allows the `POST` operation on resource path `/categories/{category}/reserve`, where `category` (corresponding to the specialization) is a path parameter. Use `ReservationRequest` as a parameter indicating that the resource expects a JSON object corresponding to `ReservationRequest` as the payload. Use `http:Created|http:InternalServerError|http:NotFound` as the return type to indicate that the response will be "Created" when the email is sent successfully to the user or the response will be "InternalServerError" or "NotFound" on error.

Reviewer: First sentence can be improved to include making the reservation? Doesn't mention sending the email either.

> 6. Define the [HTTP service (REST API)](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#rest-service) that has the resource that accepts user requests, makes calls to the backend services to retrieve relevant details, and responds to the client. Use `/healthcare` as the service path (or the context) of the service, which is attached to the listener listening on port `port`. Define an HTTP resource that allows the `POST` operation on resource path `/categories/{category}/reserve`, where `category` (corresponding to the specialization) is a path parameter. Use `ReservationRequest` as a parameter indicating that the resource expects a JSON object corresponding to `ReservationRequest` as the payload. Use `http:Created|http:InternalServerError|http:NotFound` as the return type to indicate that the response will be "Created" when the email is sent successfully to the user or the response will be "InternalServerError" or "NotFound" on error.

Reviewer 2: Check this: https://github.com/ballerina-guides/integration-tutorials/blob/main/service-orchestration/README.md?plain=1#L213...L219

Let's try to change similar to this

        return <http:Created>{};
    }
}

function getEmailContent(int appointmentNumber, Appointment appointment, Payment payment)
        returns string {
    return string `Appointment Confirmation

    Appointment Details
        Appointment Number : ${appointmentNumber}
        Appointment Date: ${appointment.appointmentDate}

    Patient Details
        Name : ${appointment.patient.name}
        Contact Number : ${appointment.patient.phone}

    Doctor Details
        Name : ${appointment.doctor.name}
        Specialization : ${appointment.doctor.category}

    Payment Details
        Doctor Fee : ${payment.actualFee}
        Discount : ${payment.discount}
        Total Fee : ${payment.discounted}
        Payment Status : ${payment.status}`;
}
```

- The first backend call is a `POST` request to the hospital service to reserve the appointment. The `hospital_id` and `category` values are used as path parameters.

```ballerina
Appointment|http:ClientError appointment =
        hospitalServicesEP->/[hospital_id]/categories/[category]/reserve.post({
    patient,
    doctor,
    hospital,
    appointment_date
});
```

> Use the `is` check to decide the flow based on the response to the client call. If the request failed, return a "NotFound" response. Else, if the payload could not be bound to `Appointment` as expected or if there were any other failures, respond with an "InternalServerError" response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use the `is` check to decide the flow based on the response to the client call. If the request failed, return a "NotFound" response. Else, if the payload could not be bound to `Appointment` as expected or if there were any other failures, respond with an "InternalServerError" response.
```

> ```ballerina
> if appointment !is Appointment {
>     log:printError("Appointment reservation failed", appointment);
>     if appointment is http:ClientRequestError {
>         return <http:NotFound>{body: string `unknown hospital, doctor, or category`};
>     }
>     return <http:InternalServerError>{body: appointment.message()};
> }
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ```ballerina
    if appointment !is Appointment {
        log:printError("Appointment reservation failed", appointment);
        if appointment is http:ClientRequestError {
            return <http:NotFound>{body: string `unknown hospital, doctor, or category`};
        }
        return <http:InternalServerError>{body: appointment.message()};
    }
    ```
```

Reviewer 2: Please check other places too

Author: Do we need these extra spaces?

> - If the appointment reservation was successful, we can make the payment by making a `POST` request to the payment service. The payload includes details extracted out from the original request (for `card_number`), the appointment reservation response (for `appointmentNumber`, `doctor`, `patient`, `fee` and `confirmed`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the appointment reservation was successful, we can make the payment by making a `POST` request to the payment service. The payload includes details extracted out from the original request (for `card_number`) and the appointment reservation response (for `appointmentNumber`, `doctor`, `patient`, `fee`, and `confirmed`)
```

Reviewer: Will this work with https://github.com/ballerina-guides/integration-tutorials/pull/6/files#diff-1260f6e8a35851293ca8f721111e07c83f96cbb8006d12c5c5c954a0a3772922L29? We spoke about removing `fee` from the appointment. May have to do another call, if so.

Author: Yes did the implementation with those changes.

```ballerina
Payment|http:ClientError payment = paymentEP->/.post({
    appointmentNumber,
    doctor: appointment.doctor,
    patient: appointment.patient,
    fee: appointment.doctor.fee,
    confirmed: appointment.confirmed,
    card_number: cardNo
});

if payment !is Payment {
    log:printError("Payment settlement failed", payment);
    if payment is http:ClientRequestError {
        return <http:NotFound>{body: string `payment failed: unknown appointment number`};
    }
    return <http:InternalServerError>{body: payment.message()};
}
```

> - If the payment was successful, the next and final step is to send an email to the user containing the appointment details. Then we create the email message with the user's email, subject, and the email body.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the payment was successful, the next and final step is to send an email to the user with the appointment details. Then we create the email message with the user's email, subject, and the email body.
```

Second sentence I would just say, "We send the email specifying the user's email address, the subject, and the email body.".

```ballerina
email:Error? sendMessage = smtpClient->sendMessage({
    to: patient.email,
    subject: "Appointment reservation confirmed at " + hospital,
    body: getEmailContent(appointmentNumber, appointment, payment)
});
```

```ballerina
function getEmailContent(int appointmentNumber, Appointment appointment, Payment payment)
        returns string =>
    let Patient patient = appointment.patient, Doctor doctor = appointment.doctor in
    string `Appointment Confirmation

    Appointment Details
        Appointment Number : ${appointmentNumber}
        Appointment Date: ${appointment.appointmentDate}

    Patient Details
        Name : ${patient.name}
        Contact Number : ${patient.phone}

    Doctor Details
        Name : ${doctor.name}
        Specialization : ${doctor.category}

    Payment Details
        Doctor Fee : ${payment.actualFee}
        Discount : ${payment.discount}
        Total Fee : ${payment.discounted}
        Payment Status : ${payment.status}`;
```

> Finally we send the email to the user using an SMTP client. If the sending process resulted in an error, an "InternalServerError" will be returned. If the email is sent successfully, the response will be a "Created" response. 

Reviewer: We already show send above. So we don't need the first sentence IMO.

Reviewer: an "InternalServerError"  -> an "InternalServerError" response

Let's test the use case by sending a request to the service.

#### Start the backend service

Download the JAR file for the backend service from the [backend service](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/integration-tutorials/blob/main/backends/hospital-service/) and execute the following command to start the service:

```bash
bal run hospitalservice.jar
```

#### Send a request

Let's send a request to the service using cURL as follows.

1. Install and set up [cURL](https://curl.se/) as your client.

2. Create a file named `request.json` with the request payload.

```json
{
    "patient": {
        "name": "John Doe",
        "dob": "1940-03-19",
        "ssn": "234-23-525",
        "address": "California",
        "phone": "8770586755",
        "email": "johndoe@gmail.com",
        "cardNo": "7844481124110331"
    },
    "doctor": "thomas collins",
    "hospital_id": "grandoaks",
    "hospital": "grand oak community hospital",
    "appointment_date": "2023-10-02"
}
```

3. Execute the following command.

```bash
curl -v -X POST --data @request.json http://localhost:8290/healthcare/categories/surgery/reserve --header "Content-Type:application/json"
```

#### Verify the email

> You will receive an email similar to the following for a successful appointment reservation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will receive an email with information similar to the following for a successful appointment reservation.
```

# Sending emails from a service

## Overview

> In this tutorial, we will develop a service that sends an email when a client makes an appointment at a hospital. The information about the appointment details is sent to the user with the email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will develop a service that sends an email when a client makes an appointment at a hospital. The email to the user includes information about the appointment.
```

        "ssn": "234-23-525",
        "address": "California",
        "phone": "8770586755",
        "email": "johndoe@gmail.com"
    },
    "hospital": "grand oak community hospital",
    "confirmed": false,
    "appointmentDate": "2023-10-02"
}
```

3. Finally, call the payment backend service to make the payment and retrieve the reservation response. Send an email to the user with the appointment details.

```json
{
    "appointmentNo": 2,
    "doctorName": "thomas collins",
    "patient": "John Doe",
    "actualFee": 7000,
    "discount": 20,
    "discounted": 5600.0,
    "paymentID": "8458c75a-c8e0-4d49-8da4-5e56043b1a20",
    "status": "settled"
}
```

### Concepts covered

- REST API
- HTTP Client
- Email Client

## Develop the application

### Step 1: Set up the workspace

Install [Ballerina Swan Lake](https://ballerina.io/downloads/) and the [Ballerina Swan Lake VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=wso2.ballerina) on VS Code.

### Step 2: Develop the service

Follow the instructions given in this section to develop the service.

1. Create a new Ballerina project using the `bal` command and open it in VS Code.

```bash

> $ bal new service-orchestration

Reviewer: Wrong name.

```

2. Introduce the source code in files with the `.bal` extension (e.g., the `main.bal` file). 

Import the 
- `ballerina/email` module to send emails using the SMTP protocol
- `ballerina/http` module to develop the REST API and define the clients that can be used to send requests to the backend services
- `ballerina/log` module to log debug/error information for each client request

```ballerina
import ballerina/email;
import ballerina/http;
import ballerina/log;
```

> 3. Define six [configurable variables](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#configurability) for the port on which the listener should listen, the URLs of the backend services and for host, username and password of the SMTP client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Define [configurable variables](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#configurability) for the port on which the listener should listen and the URLs of the backend services. Also define configurable variables for the host, username, and password of the SMTP client.
```

```ballerina

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

configurable int port = 8290;
configurable string hospitalServicesBackend = "http://localhost:9090";
configurable string paymentBackend = "http://localhost:9090/healthcare/payments";

> configurable string gmailHost = "smtp.gmail.com";

Reviewer: Can just be host. Given that it can be non-gmail too.

> configurable string gmailHost = "smtp.gmail.com";

Reviewer: Can just be host. Given that it can be non-gmail too.

configurable string senderAddress = ?;

> configurable string appPassword = ?;

Reviewer: I would use host, username, and password.

```

> 4. Define two [`http:Client` clients](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#http-client) and one [`email:SmtpClient` client](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#email-client) to send requests to the backend services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Define two [`http:Client`](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#http-client) clients and one [`email:SmtpClient`](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#email-client) client to send requests to the backend services.
```

```ballerina
final http:Client hospitalServicesEP = check initializeHttpClient(hospitalServicesBackend);
final http:Client paymentEP = check initializeHttpClient(paymentBackend);
final email:SmtpClient smtpClient = check initializeEmailClient();

function initializeHttpClient(string url) returns http:Client|error => new (url);

function initializeEmailClient() returns email:SmtpClient|error => new (gmailHost, senderAddress, appPassword);
```

The argument to the `new` expression is the URL for the backend service. 

Alternatively, the clients can be initialized directly with `new` expressions, but a separate function is used to aid with testing.

```ballerina
final http:Client hospitalServicesEP = check new (hospitalServicesBackend);
final http:Client paymentEP = check new (paymentBackend);

> ```

Reviewer: Shall we make this a Note like Dulaj had suggested? Changed for service orchestration too.

    int appointmentNumber;
    Doctor doctor;
    Patient patient;
    boolean confirmed;
    string hospital;
    string appointmentDate;
|};

type PaymentSettlement record {|
    int appointmentNumber;
    Doctor doctor;
    Patient patient;
    decimal fee;
    boolean confirmed;
    string card_number;
|};

type Payment record {|
    int appointmentNo;
    string doctorName;
    string patient;
    decimal actualFee;
    int discount;
    decimal discounted;
    string paymentID;
    string status;
|};

type ReservationRequest record {|
    record {|
        *Patient;
        string cardNo;
    |} patient;
    string doctor;
    string hospital_id;
    string hospital;
    string appointment_date;
|};

type ReservationResponse record {|
    int appointmentNo;
    string doctorName;
    string patient;
    decimal actualFee;
    int discount;
    decimal discounted;
    string paymentID;
    string status;
|};
```

- The `ReservationRequest` record uses [record type inclusion](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/type-inclusion-for-records/) in the type of the `patient` field to include all the fields from the `Patient` record along with the `cardNo` field.

> - The initial record definitions can be generated using the "Paste JSON as record" VSCode command with the relevant JSON payloads and the records can then be modified as necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The initial record definitions can be generated using the "Paste JSON as record" VS Code command with the relevant JSON payloads and the records can then be modified as necessary.
```

Please fix wherever applicable.

> 6. Define the [HTTP service (REST API)](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#rest-service) that has the resource that accepts user requests, makes calls to the backend services to retrieve relevant details, and responds to the client. Use `/healthcare` as the service path (or the context) of the service, which is attached to the listener listening on port `port`. Define an HTTP resource that allows the `POST` operation on resource path `/categories/{category}/reserve`, where `category` (corresponding to the specialization) is a path parameter. Use `ReservationRequest` as a parameter indicating that the resource expects a JSON object corresponding to `ReservationRequest` as the payload. Use `http:InternalServerError|http:Created|http:NotFound` as the return type to indicate that the response will be "Created" when the email is sent successfully to the user or the response will be "InternalServerError" or "NotFound" on error.

Reviewer: `http:InternalServerError|http:Created|http:NotFound`

May change if we return nil, but I would usually do

`http:Created|http:InternalServerError|http:NotFound` to separate out success vs error responses.

        return <http:Created>{};
    }
}

function getEmailContent(int appointmentNumber, Appointment appointment, Payment payment)
        returns string {
    return string `Appointment Confirmation

    Appointment Details
        Appointment Number : ${appointmentNumber}
        Appointment Date: ${appointment.appointmentDate}

    Patient Details
        Name : ${appointment.patient.name}
        Contact Number : ${appointment.patient.phone}

    Doctor Details
        Name : ${appointment.doctor.name}
        Specialization : ${appointment.doctor.category}

    Payment Details
        Doctor Fee : ${payment.actualFee}
        Discount : ${payment.discount}
        Total Fee : ${payment.discounted}
        Payment Status : ${payment.status}`;
}
```

- The first backend call is a `POST` request to the hospital service to reserve the appointment. The `hospital_id` and `category` values are used as path parameters.

```ballerina
Appointment|http:ClientError appointment =
        hospitalServicesEP->/[hospital_id]/categories/[category]/reserve.post({
    patient,
    doctor,
    hospital,
    appointment_date
});
```

> Use the `is` check to decide the flow based on the response to the client call. If the request failed, return a "NotFound" response. Else, if the payload could not be bound to `Appointment` as expected or if there were any other failures, respond with an "InternalServerError" response.

Reviewer: These need to be indented, right?

Author: It seems to be fine for me 

<img width="764" alt="Screenshot 2023-09-20 at 20 49 23" src="https://github.com/ballerina-guides/integration-tutorials/assets/61020198/2c31576d-9987-4ee7-8f89-5052802a8693">

Reviewer: May need indentation like https://github.com/ballerina-guides/integration-tutorials/pull/6/files#diff-78790ab87e16ce7a1fb25dd2e6a09eac61aa57736d1d2d9f35e1d14828760d7eR343.

```ballerina
if appointment !is Appointment {
    log:printError("Appointment reservation failed", appointment);
    if appointment is http:ClientRequestError {
        return <http:NotFound>{body: string `unknown hospital, doctor, or category`};
    }
    return <http:InternalServerError>{body: appointment.message()};
}
```

> If the appointment reservation was successful, we can make the payment by making a `POST` request to the payment service. The payload includes details extracted out from the original request (for `card_number`), the appointment reservation response (for `appointmentNumber`, `doctor`, `patient`, `fee` and `confirmed`)

Reviewer: This can be a bullet point at the same level of L318?

```ballerina
Payment|http:ClientError payment = paymentEP->/.post({
    appointmentNumber,
    doctor: appointment.doctor,
    patient: appointment.patient,
    fee: appointment.doctor.fee,
    confirmed: appointment.confirmed,
    card_number: cardNo
});

if payment !is Payment {
    log:printError("Payment settlement failed", payment);
    if payment is http:ClientRequestError {
        return <http:NotFound>{body: string `unknown appointment number`};
    }
    return <http:InternalServerError>{body: payment.message()};
}
```

> If the payment was successful, the next and final step is to send an email to the user containing the appointment details as the email body, namely, `Appointment Details`, `Patient Details`, `Doctor Details` and `Payment Details`. Then we create the email message with the user's email, subject and the email body.

Reviewer: Bullet point.

Reviewer: Do we really need the "namely, `Appointment Details`, `Patient Details`, `Doctor Details` and `Payment Details`" part?

Reviewer: Need a comma before " and the email body".

Author: > Do we really need the "namely, `Appointment Details`, `Patient Details`, `Doctor Details` and `Payment Details`" part?

Removed that part

```ballerina
email:Error? sendMessage = smtpClient->sendMessage({
    to: patient.email,
    subject: "Appointment reservation confirmed at " + hospital,
    body: getEmailContent(appointmentNumber, appointment, payment)
});
```

```ballerina
function getEmailContent(int appointmentNumber, Appointment appointment, Payment payment)
        returns string {
    return string `Appointment Confirmation

    Appointment Details
        Appointment Number : ${appointmentNumber}
        Appointment Date: ${appointment.appointmentDate}

    Patient Details
        Name : ${appointment.patient.name}
        Contact Number : ${appointment.patient.phone}

    Doctor Details
        Name : ${appointment.doctor.name}
        Specialization : ${appointment.doctor.category}

    Payment Details
        Doctor Fee : ${payment.actualFee}
        Discount : ${payment.discount}
        Total Fee : ${payment.discounted}
        Payment Status : ${payment.status}`;
}
```

> Finally we send the email to the user using an SMTP client. If the sending process resulted in an error, an "InternalServerError" will be returned. If the email is sent successfully, the response will be "Created". 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally we send the email to the user using an SMTP client. If the sending process resulted in an error, an "InternalServerError" will be returned. If the email is sent successfully, the response will be a "Created" response. 
```

```ballerina
email:Error? sendMessage = smtpClient->sendMessage({
    to: patient.email,
    subject: "Appointment reservation confirmed at " + hospital,
    body: getEmailContent(appointmentNumber, appointment, payment)
});

if sendMessage is email:Error {
    return <http:InternalServerError>{body: sendMessage.message()};
}
log:printDebug("Email sent successfully",
                name = patient.name,
                appointmentNumber = appointmentNumber);
return <http:Created>{};
```

#### Complete source

> You have successfully developed the required service.

Reviewer: Move this to above the heading.

# Sending emails from a service

## Overview

> In this tutorial, you will develop a service that accepts requests to make an appointment at a hospital, and sends an email to the client confirming the appointment reservation details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will develop a service that accepts requests to make an appointment at a hospital, makes the appointment, and sends an email to the client confirming the appointment details.
```

        "dob": "1940-03-19",
        "ssn": "234-23-525",
        "address": "California",
        "phone": "8770586755",
        "email": "johndoe@gmail.com",
        "cardNo": "7844481124110331"
    },
    "doctor": "thomas collins",
    "hospital_id": "grandoaks",
    "hospital": "grand oak community hospital",
    "appointment_date": "2023-10-02"
}
```

2. Extract necessary details from the request (e.g., hospital, patient, doctor, etc.) and make a call to the hospital backend service to request an appointment. A response similar to the following will be returned from the hospital backend service on success.

```json
{
    "appointmentNumber": 1,
    "doctor": {
        "name": "thomas collins",
        "hospital": "grand oak community hospital",
        "category": "surgery",
        "availability": "9.00 a.m - 11.00 a.m",
        "fee": 7000.0
    },
    "patient": {
        "name": "John Doe",
        "dob": "1940-03-19",
        "ssn": "234-23-525",
        "address": "California",
        "phone": "8770586755",
        "email": "johndoe@gmail.com"
    },
    "hospital": "grand oak community hospital",
    "confirmed": false,
    "appointmentDate": "2023-10-02"
}
```

> 3. Finally, call the payment backend service to make the payment and retrieve the reservation response. If the payment is successful send an email to the user with the appointment details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Call the payment backend service to make the payment and retrieve the reservation response which will have a payload similar to that shown below. If the payment is successful, send an email to the user with the appointment details.
```
